
---> LINUX KERNEL 

 Linux is an open-source, Unix-like operating system that was first released by Linus Torvalds in 1991. 
 It was created as an alternative to proprietary operating systems like Windows and macOS, and quickly gained 
 popularity among developers and system administrators for its flexibility, security, and stability.

---> 001. LINUX DISTRIBUTIONS 
---> 002. LINUX DIRECTORIES 
---> 003. NAVIGATION METHODS 
---> 004. COMMAND EXECUTION FLOW 
---> 005. MAN PAGE REFERENCE 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

---> 001. LINUX DISTRIBUTIONS 
 
 Debian-based distributions     - .deb    -  Ubuntu, Linux Mint, and Debian itself.
 Red Hat-based distributions    - .rpm    -  CentOS, Fedora, and Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL).
 Arch-based distributions       - Pacman  -  Arch Linux itself, Manjaro, and EndeavourOS.  
 Gentoo-based distributions     - Portage -  Gentoo itself, Sabayon, and Funtoo. 
 Slackware-based distributions  - .tgz    -  Slackware itself, Zenwalk, and Absolute Linux.
 SUSE-based distributions       - .rpm    -  openSUSE, SUSE Linux Enterprise, and Leap.
 Independent distributions      - own pkg -  Solus, Puppy Linux, and Gentoox.


---> 002. LINUX DIRECTORIES 
 
 01. /bin     -  bin, contains binary executable files. These are files that can be executed by the Linux operating system
 02. /sbin    -  sbin, directory contains system binaries that are used by the Linux operating system
 03. /usr     -  usr, directory contains the majority of the Linux operating system files, including user programs and libraries.
 04. /etc     -  etc contains configuration files for the Linux operating system and applications.
 05. /var     -  Variable data files, such as logs and temporary files
 06. /tmp     -  Temporary file storage by the system
 07. /boot    -  Files needed to boot the Linux operating system. These files include the Linux kernel and bootloader.
 08. /proc    -  Contains information about processes running on the Linux operating system.
 09. /home    -  This directory contains the home directories of users. Each user has their own subdirectory under /home.
 10. /root    -  This directory is the home directory of the root user.
 11. /mnt     -  Mounting file systems, such as external hard drives
 12. /media   -  Mount point for removable media devices
 13. /dev     -  Device files that represent physical and virtual devices
 14. /opt     -  Installing third-party software applications
 15. /lib     -  This directory contains shared libraries that are used by the Linux operating system and applications.
     
---> 003. NAVIGATION METHODS 
  
 An absolute path - " $ cat /home/e00049/documents/projects/report.txt "
 A relative path  - " $ cd /home
                     [ /home ]$ cd e00049/
		     [ /home/e00049 ]$ cd documents/
		     [ /home/e00049/documents ]$ cd projects/
		     [ /home/e00049/documents/projects ]$ cat report.txt " 
	  
---> 004. COMMAND EXECUTION FLOW 

 $ command <options> <source> <destination>   - Left to Right Execution Flow  

---> 005. MAN PAGE REFERENCE 

 $ man <linux-command>

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Linux commands can be classified into 6 categories:

 001. File Handling Commands
 002. User Management Commands
 003. Storage Handling Commands
 004. Network Handling Commands
 005. Process Handling Commands
 006. Resources Handling Commands


---> 001. Linux file Handling commands in Linux <---

 01. touch    - That allows you to update the access and modification times of files or create new empty files.
 02. cat      - cat is a command-line utility that is used to concatenate and display the contents of files.
 03. head     - To display the first few lines of a file. The name "head" refers to the head (i.e., beginning) of a file.
 04. tail     - Display the last few lines of a file. The name "tail" refers to the tail (i.e., end) of a file.
 05. less     - less is a command-line utility that is used to view the contents of a file in a paginated format.
 06. more     - To view the contents of a file one screen at a time. It is similar to less, but with fewer features.
 07. mkdir    - mkdir is a command-line utility that is used to create a new directory (or folder) in the file system. 
 08. cd       - cd is a command-line utility that is used to change the current working directory.
 09. pwd      - pwd is a command-line utility that is used to print the current working directory.
 10. ls       - ls is a command-line utility that is used to list the contents of a directory.
 11. stat     - stat is a command-line utility that is used to display detailed information about a file or file system.
 12. rm       - rm is a command-line utility that is used to remove files or directories.
 13. awk      - To process and manipulate data and produce formatted reports. 
 14. cut      - To cut out sections of a specified file or piped data and print the result to std output.
 15. sed      - Searching, edit and manipulate text files, find and replace, insertion or deletion.
 16. grep     - To search for matching patterns in a file. grep is short for "global regular expression print".
 17. file     - File command is used to determine the type of a file. 
 18. cp       - cp is a command-line utility that is used to copy files and directories from one location to another.
 19. mv       - Move or Rename the files or directories. 
 20. tar      - Archiving utility. It helps create, extract, and list archive contents.
 21. ln       - Create Soft Link and Hard Links
 22. find     - Find files and directories based on conditions
 23. locate   - Used to search for files and directories based on their names or other attributes.
 24. wc       - Count a file's word, line, character, or byte count.
 25. tee      - Reads standard input, then writes the output of a program to std output and file or files. 
 26. echo     - Command-line utility that is used to display messages or values of variables on the terminal or in a file.

---> 002. User Management commands in Linux <---

01. w          - Shows information about the currently logged-in users and their processes.
02. whoami     - Username of the current user in the terminal. the user who is currently logged in to the system.
03. id         - Display user and group information for the current user or for a specified user.
04. last       - last command in Linux is used to display a list of recently logged-in users and their sessions. 
05. su         - su command in Linux is used to switch to a different user account from within a terminal.
06. useradd    - The useradd command in Linux is used to add a new user account to the system.
07. usermod    - The usermod command in Linux is used to modify an existing user account.
08. userdel    - The userdel command in Linux is used to delete an existing user account from the system.
09. groupadd   - The groupadd command in Linux is used to create a new group on the system. 
10. groupmod   - The groupmod command in Linux is used to modify an existing group on the system. 
11. groupdel   - which is used to delete an existing group from the system.
12. chown      - The chown command in Linux is used to change the owner of a file or directory. 
13. chmod      - The chmod command in Linux is used to change the permissions of a file or directory.
14. umask      - To set the default file creation permissions for new files and directories created by a user. 
15. getfacl    - Get file name, owner, the group, and the ACL.
16. setfacl    - Sets modifies, or removes the ACL to regular files and directories
17. passwd     - To change the password of the current user or another user on the system.
18. chage      - The chage command in Linux is used to change the password expiry information for a user account.
19. sudo       - Allows a user to execute commands with the privileges of another user, usually the root user. 
20. finger     - Used to display information about a user or a group of users on the system.

 ---> 003: Storage Handling Commands in Linux <---

01. du          - Disk usage - to display the disk usage of a directory.          
02. df          - Disk free - to display the amount of free space on the disk.
03. mount       - Mount a file system to a specified directory in the file system hierarchy. 
04. umount      - Mounted a file system umount from file hierarchy.
05. fdisk       - Linux is a tool used for disk partitioning.
06. lsblk       - List all the available block devices on the system.
07. blkid       - Identifying the unique identifiers and file system types of block devices.
08. mkfs        - Create a file system on a given block device or partition. 
09. parted      - For partitioning hard disks. 
10. pvdisplay   - Display detailed information about physical volumes (PVs) on the system.
11. vgdisplay   - Detailed information about volume groups (VGs) on the system. 
12. lvdisplay   - Detailed information about logical volumes (LVs) on the system.
13. vgextend    - Linux used to extend a volume group (VG).
14. lvextend    - Used to extend the size of a logical volume (LV) in a Linux LVM system.
15. findmnt     - File system mounted at the mount point.
16. swapon      - Command in Linux used to activate swap space on a system. 
17. swapoff     - Command in Linux used to deactivate swap space on a system. 
18. sestatus    - To get SELinux Status.
19. getenforce  - Command in Linux used to check the current SELinux mode. 
20. setenforce  -  Used to change the current SELinux mode.

 ---> 004: Network Handling Commands in Linux <---

01. ip          - Command displays the current network interfaces and their associated IP addresses.
02. ping        - It is used to test the connectivity between two hosts on a network.
03. nslookup    - Query Domain Name System (DNS) servers to obtain info about domain names and IP addresses. 
04. nmap        - Is a popular network exploration and security auditing tool.
05. ssh         - To establish a secure shell connection to a remote host.
06. ssh-keygen  - Used for gen and managing SSH pub and priv key pairs for secure auth and encryption.
07. ssh-copy-id - For copying a user's public key to a remote system's authorized keys file.
08. sshpass     - Automating SSH password authentication in scripts and other automated workflows. 
09. nmcli       - Network connections via the NetworkManager daemon.
10. nmtui       - Managing network connections via a text-based user interface.
11. netstat     - Displaying network-related information such as active network connections.
12. ss          - Linux used for displaying information about active network sockets and related statistics.
13. curl        - Transferring data to or from a server using one of the supported protocols.
14. wget        - For retrieving files from a remote server using the HTTP, HTTPS, or FTP protocols. 
15. scp         - Retrieving files from a remote server using the HTTP, HTTPS, or FTP
16. rsync       - Synchronizing files and directories between local and remote hosts.
17. hostnamectl - Displaying and setting the hostname and related system information. 
18. dig         - Querying DNS (Domain Name System) servers to retrieve information about domain names.
19. traceroute  - Trace the path that a packet takes from a source device to a destination device over a network.
20. tracepath   - Discover the route a packet takes to reach a network host or server.

 ---> 005: Process Handling Commands in Linux <---

01. ps          - Display information about currently running processes on the system.
02. top         - For system administrators and developers who need to monitor the performance of a Linux system.
03. kill        - The kill command in Linux is used to terminate a running process by sending it a signal. 
04. killall     - The killall command is used to terminate all processes with a specified name.
05. nice        - To adjust the priority of a process. The priority level is ranging from -20 to 19. 0 default priority.
06. renice      - The renice command is used to change the priority of a running process.
07. fg          - The fg command in Linux is used to bring a background process to the foreground.
08. bg          - The bg command in Linux is used to send a suspended or stopped process to run in the background. 
09. systemctl   - Linux used to manage the systemd system and service manager.
10. env         - Display the current environment variables or run a command in a modified environment.
11. cron        - Daemon runs continuously in the bg and can be configured to execute tasks at any desired frequency.
12. sleep       - To pause the execution of a shell script or a command for a specified amount of time. 
13. nohup       - Execute a command or script in the bg and disconnect from the terminal without terminating the process. 
14. at          - that allows users to schedule the execution of a command or script at a specified time in the future.
15. exec        - In Linux, exec is a command that is used to replace the current process image with a new process image.
16. jobs        - In Linux, the jobs command is used to display a list of all jobs that are currently running in the background or stopped.
17. watch       - Used to execute a command or a shell script periodically at a specified interval and display the output on the terminal screen.
18. export      - In Linux, the export command is used to set environment variables.
19. unset       - In Linux, the unset command is used to remove an environment variable or function.
20. screen      - Allows you to create and manage multiple terminal sessions within a single terminal window or remote shell session. 
21. banner      - command is used to create large, banner-style text that can be printed to the console or redirected to a file.
22. pgrep       - The pgrep command is used to search for processes that match a specified pattern and return their PIDs.


--->  006: Resource Handling commands in Linux <---

01. alias       - In Linux, the alias command is used to create a shorthand name for a command or a series of commands.
02. history     - Command is used to display a list of previously executed commands in the current shell session. 
03. clear       - To clear the terminal screen by removing all previous command output and displaying a blank screen.
04. date        - Displays or sets the system date and time.
05. time        - The time command is used to determine how long a given command takes to run.
06. uptime      - Displays how long the system has been running and the current system load average.
07. uname       - Displays certain system info like kernel name, release and version, hardware name, and OS.
08. free        - Displays the amount of free and used memory in the system.
09. lscpu       - lscpu that displays information about the system's CPU architecture.
10. lsmem       - It displays system's memory layout, including information such as the total amount of memory installed.
11. lsusb       - It displays a list of USB devices that are currently connected to the system.
12. lslogins    - Lists inform about all known user accounts on the system.
13. lsipc       - This lsipc shows a list of System V IPC objects on the system.
14. lslocks     - List of file locks on the system. Each lock is identified by the process ID and name of the process. 
15. lsmod       - lsmod that is used to list currently loaded kernel modules.
16. lsns        - lsns that is used to list the currently available namespaces.
17. dmidecode   - Display information about the hardware components on a system. 
18. timedatectl - That is used to query and change the system time and date settings.
19. vmstat      - vmstat that is used to report statistics about virtual memory usage, system processes, and CPU usage.
20. iostat      - That is used to monitor system input/output (I/O) device activity, including disk usage statistics.
21. dstat       - dstat is a versatile tool for generating system resource statistics in real-time. 
22. dmesg       - The kernel ring buffer messages. Messages that the kernel has generated during the boot process.
23. journalctl  - Query and view logs from the systemd journal. The systemd journal - store and manage system logs.
24. localectl   - Linux systems to control and query the system's locale and keyboard configuration.
25. init        - Critical process that plays a vital role in managing the Linux system's startup, ongoing operation.
26. runlevel    - The command to check the current run level in a Linux system depends on the init system being used.

